---
title: Information Theory in LLM Theory
bibFile: data/bibliography.json # path relative to project root
---


## Introduction

## Background

 

### A Brief Introduction on Information Theory

In this section we want to provide a brief overview on Information Theory. 


Draft:
- start with everyday life example, that will make reader think of how one could formalize amount of information

- explain shannons information theory
    - name entropy definition
    - extract definition of information 
    - define mutual information, briefly mention why it is usefull


- briefly name an example applications from coding theory
- briefly name an example of neurology where neurons may maximize their entropy




### Philosofical Interlude: Does Information Exist?

Chapter Draft (everything in this draft is very vague, dont read)
- make reader know that you are critic of your own ideas
 - Previous Section information relied on an assumed probability space
 - what is probability? It is a way to formally express of what can be known and what can not be known? (<- express waeknasses of that thought and derive it and be more precise and present alternatives of expressong of what can be known and what not)
- Problems of probability:
    - How well can be known what can not be know? Well enough to express probabilitys?

    - maybe also everything can be known and everything happens with probability one (<- drop argument, why one can not be sure that universe is not deterministic universe, by using argument based on an explanation why even anything exists)
        - explain that under that circumstances only physically isolated can be known, using similar "proof" as holding theorems proof
        - include limitations of calculation power into probability?
- use previous arguments to express where probabilistic assumptions might  be off and name examples on how it could affect us practically
- conclude if we are carefull enough with probabilistic assumptions under scenario a everything has information 0, under scenario b everything has information $\infty$ and under scenario a using limitation of physical possible calculation power information content is impossibly hard to compute
- mention that information theory has been usefull anyway



## The Link of Information Theory and LLMs

## Analyzing Neural Network Architectures {#anal_nn}

In this chapter results from {{< cite "jeon2022information" >}} and {{< cite "jeon2024information" >}} will be discussed. For several generative models models upper bounds have been established of how much information they can generate. These results can be used make statements about the expressiveness of different neuronal architecture. (<- be more precise about expressivemness)



## An Information Theoretic Perspective Analysis on In-Context Learning

In {{< cite "jeon2024information" >}} assumptions about the origin of the trianing data of LLMs have been made from which an explanation of in context learning was stated.


### What is In-Context Learning


### Results and Methodology {{< cite "jeon2024information" >}}

In [Analyzing Neural Network Architecture](#anal_nn) we discussed, how much information a given neural architecture can generate. The infered bounds can also be used to make statements about the training data probability space, if a certain assumption about that training data probability space was made. Which? The training data was generated by a random neural network of a given architecture. We will evaluate the pros and cons of such an assumption in [Discusion of their Assumptions](#discussion-assumptions). Once the probability space of neuronal specified 




### Discusion of their Assumptions {#discussion-assumptions}

#### When can we make assumptions of the the familie of AMs

Lets suppose following scenario: we have a sequence of random tokens $X_1, ..., X_T$ and know that this sequence is autoregressive, which means $\mathbb P(X_{t+1} | H_t) = \mathbb P(X_{t+1}|H_t, X_{t+2}, ...X_{T})$.
Then, trivially, the distribution of $H_T$ can be charachterized by the function $f(H_t) = \mathbb P(X_{t+1} | H_t)$. Thus there is a trivial bijection from the set $\{ \Sigma^T \to \mathcal P_\Sigma \}$ to the Autoregressive distributions over the alphabet $\Sigma$ and length $T$. (<- warning you have to integrate the non character sign to sigma and that can only be place to the right position (change $\Sigma^T$)).

Lets suppose we are reely lucky and  find a parmatrization of all autoregressive distributions of horizon T by finding an injektive function $A :\mathbb J_\sigma^n \to \{\Sigma^T \to \mathcal P_\Sigma \}$, where $\mathbb J_\sigma ^n := \{||x||_2 = \sigma, \mathbb{1} ^T x=0 | x \in \mathbb R^n\}$.


(

Let now $\Theta \sim \mathcal N(0,I_n\sigma)$. Then $A(\Theta)$ is a random random distribution which itself is a random distribution. This means $A(\Theta) \in \{\Sigma^T \to \mathcal P_\Sigma \}$ (Note $X \sim \mathcal N(0,1) \to x \notin \mathbb R$) 

<!--This means there must exits $\theta \in \mathbb J^n$, such that  $A(\theta) = A^{-1}(A(\Theta))$-->

<!--Try to find argument that autogenerative model can not create itsel, can not be a finite horizon thing, but I think that is going nowhere-->


If A exists, and we  insert random vector into A, then that random variable is element of As image




<!--Say that iid if theta is not the worst case assumption for our model.-->

To recapulate, we assumed/showed evidence, that there can exist a pair $A_t,\theta$ that can generate any upper bounded horizon distribution, when $\theta$ is empirical gaussian and $A_t$ is a parametrization function for transformers. Lets suppose we wanted to use that knowledge to find an upper bound for the error of the optimal bayeisan optimizer e.g.  an upper bound of the mutual information H_t Theta. Can we do that by using the random random distribution $\Theta \sim \mathcal N(0,\sigma)$, as that way $\Theta$ is the probability distribution with maximal differential entropy? 
<!-- Not sure yet whether this is the actual problem -->
The problem is, that there exists $\theta \in \mathbb J^n$, s.t. $A(\theta) = A(\Theta)$.

The problem is, that this assumes, that $A$ is the only function (it is actually class of function) that can do that (explain what). Why
 suppose B (b entagles and makes dependencies) 



)





## Conclusion

In this blog post several applications of Information Theory in Deep Learning and LLMs where presented. 

## Take home messages


# References
{{< bibliography >}} 
